underlying financial restructuring. While the pre/post-merger period studied
may be too short to observe changes in long-term financial performance,;;et al (7) found substantial operational changes (e.g. consolidation, conversion
to other uses, closure) over a similar post-merger period,;;statistical techniques and no statistical tests were performed.
Woolley (57,;;compared to non-merging hospitals. Merger announcements increased market
values of for-profit hospitals and chains over their competitors (1.4%),;;either oligopoly pricing or signaling of opportunities to increase efficiency.
Vita & Schumann (52) point out that these effects are weak,;;as a result of merger. Two of the studies used t-tests to test hypotheses of
pre/post-merger hospital characteristics on small samples,;;hospitals. Few differences were observed after stratifying mergers by size and
ownership,;; but later mergers had larger effects. Mergers had moderate effects on
the rate of change of operational characteristics,;;occurring between 1983–1988. Approximately 42% of acquired hospitals con-
tinued to provide acute care services,;;likely motivation for merger. Another 41% converted general acute care facili-
ties to other inpatient uses (e.g. psychiatric and substance abuse, rehabilitation,;;inpatient uses.
These results are strikingly different than those of Alexander et al (1),;;mergers.
In summary,;;hospitals. Our understanding of hospital vertical integration to date is largely
drawn from case studies and descriptive surveys,;;determinants of hospital integration into subacute care. Despite heightened in-
terest in vertically (and virtually) integrated delivery systems,;;for innovation in methods of managing care. The deintegration of vertically
integrated hospital-centered health care systems may be evidence that,;;virtually (contractually) integrated competitors.
CAUSES The causes of vertical integration,;;care. Instead, these decisions were primarily an artifact of the governmental
uniform pricing system for skilled nursing care,;;the determinants of diversification. Efficiency rationales for diversification
include economies of scope (production, marketing and distribution),;;risk and returns through portfolio diversification. Other rationales are related
to managerialism,;;allocating hospital costs and outputs to particular products or lines of business.
CAUSES The causes of hospital diversification,;;atively high degree of medical/surgical training (e.g. outpatient respiratory ther-
apy, radiology, neurological diagnostics),;;mary care group practice). Physicians generally oppose hospital diversification
efforts that compete with existing physician practices,;;review intensity. For system hospitals, more diversified services were provided
for hospitals that had high inpatient volume,;;more variation in return on assets. Diversification did not increase short-term
profits,;;as the unit of analysis. Regression models were used to estimate effects on
operating margins and return on assets,;;tions/Integrated Delivery Systems and Tyler & Co. found that 57% of PHOs
were less than two years old,;; and 12% were less than six months old (4). Long-
standing sources of secondary data on hospitals for research,;;relationships, but not the degree of participation (e.g. percentage of affected
physicians, contracts,;;ganization strategies in 1993 (n D 1357). Market characteristics were only
associated with physician participation in hospital budgeting,;;participation in management. Of hospitals adopting physician-hospital orga-
nization strategies since 1991,;;margins and positively related to prior average Medicare costs per discharge.
This study did not control for state regulatory differences,;;organizations. Ernst & Young’s 1994 survey (18) found that the hospital’s ob-
jective in most PHOs is to improve relationships with physicians,;;for negotiating managed care contracts with health plans. In a recent sur-
vey of 17 hospitals,;;1495), supplemented with data from the American Hospital Association. The
survey used a stratified random design,;;owned, other community). Only 23.3% of hospitals participated in at least
one form of physician organizational arrangement. Of these hospitals,;; 64.4%
had a physician-hospital organization (PHO),;; 32.6% a management services
organization (MSO), 15.5% a foundation,;;arrangements (e.g. physician-hospital organization, management services or-
ganization),;;tion on hospital costs in 1982 (n D 1521). The sample included all hospitals
in rate-setting states,;;profit hospitals were oversampled. Hospital-physician integration was defined
as physician participation in hospital administration, hospital-based physicians,;;physician organizations were studied.
Hospital costs per discharge were higher for hospitals that were large,;;salary, and casemix. By most measures, hospital-physician integration was not
associated with lower hospital costs per discharge,;;hospitals from 1981–1990 (approximately 300 per year). Physician integration
was defined as physician involvement in governance, physician ownership,;;occupancy rates. Financial integration was associated with lower operating
margins,;;interpretation of the coefficients difficult. No specific theory was used to justify
the specification of the model,;;included. The direction of causality between financial performance and adop-
tion is also unclear,;;mission and higher net revenue. The measure of physician-system integration
relates to the degree of physician involvement in the system and its governance,;;tal systems had higher costs than independent hospitals. Shortell (48) also
reviewed studies of systems through the early 1980s,;;pitals. The more recent studies in this review detected lower marginal and
average costs per stay in system than independent hospitals,;;cal techniques. Recent hospital mergers had moderate, rather than dramatic,
effects on the rate of change in operating costs, staffing,;; and scale. Mergers
rarely resulted in hospital closure,;;negotiation of managed care contracts. While hospitals continue to acquire
substantial numbers of physician practices each year,;;practices that produce few inpatient services. Physician-hospital organizations
are often formed in response to activities of specific hospital competitors,;;nancial integration (e.g. stock ownership) are associated with lower hospital
financial performance,;;integration.
Despite a substantial body of literature on hospital organization,;;pirical study. There is a compelling need for more systematic research into the
causes of hospital organizational diversification and, ultimately,;;as data become available. The bridge between policy analysis demands and
economic theory is still missing in the health services research literature,;;though this problem extends beyond the study of hospitals. This is ironic in
light of the intense interest in hospital vertical integration,;;tivities, characterized by its incentive structures and administrative controls.
Generic forms of governance are often described in terms of markets, hybrids,;;and hierarchies. The most efficient governance structure for a transaction is
one that minimizes production and transaction costs,;;ternative structures, in a specific environment.
INPUT The factors of production (labor, capital, supplies,;;managerial expertise.
INTERMEDIATE PRODUCT In a production process with several stages,;;misspecified if it does not represent the “true” behavioral relationship. Mis-
specification can arise for many reasons, including measurement error,;;variables, endogeneity, and self-selection (26). Depending on the type of spec-
ification error, the econometric model may have biased parameter estimates,;;is usually derived from an underlying theory. In economics the behavior of
an organization is often portrayed as cost-minimizing, profit-maximizing,;;lection process is not part of the model. The model incorrectly attributes the
effects of the selection process to the explanatory variables,;;parameter estimates.
TRANSACTION COSTS The comparative costs of planning, adapting,;;itoring task completion under alternative governance structures. Transaction
costs include not only the costs of negotiating agreements,;;Health Serv. Admin. 35(1):83–102
3. Alexander JA,;;tors bring losses. Wall St. J. June 17:B4
7. Bogue RJ, Shortell SM, Sohn MW, Man-
heim LM, Bazzoli GJ,;;Med. Care 33(7):676–86
8. Burns LR,;;The Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism.
Cambridge,;;min. 33(1):99–110
12. Clement JP, D’Aunno T,;;Serv. Res. 27(6):741–63
13. Conrad DA, Mick SS, Watts Madden C,;;Med. Care Rev. 45(1):49–100
14. Cowing TG,;;Res. 22(1):68–89
22. Gertler PJ,;;industry. J. Polit. Econ. 100(6):1232–56
23. Goes JB,;;Health Serv. Res. 30(4):507–30
24. Grannemann TW, Brown RS,;;analysis. Rev. Econ. Stat. 78(3):470–81
26. Kennedy P. 1992. A Guide to Economet-
rics. Cambridge,;;Serv. Res. 32(2):177–96
31. Milgrom P,;;aries and structure of the firm. In Eco-
nomics, Organization,;;tems. In Adv. Health Econ. Health Serv.
Res., ed. RM Scheffler, LF Rossiter,;;Aff. 15(4):62–73
35. Mullner RM,;;Health Econ. Health Serv. Res., ed. RM
Scheffler, LF Rossiter,;;tal. RAND/UCLA/Harvard Cent. Health
Care Finan. Policy Res., Santa Monica,;;sion. 1995. Annual Report to Congress.
Washington,;;cialty Care. Rep. Physician Paym. Rev.
Comm., Washington,;;tional Survey of Physicians. Washing-
ton,;;Extramur. rep. E-96–02 Prospect. Paym.
Assess. Comm., Washington,;;the firm. Med. Care Res. Rev. 54(1):3–24
47. Robinson JC,;;Rev. 45(2):177–214
49. Shortell SM, Gillies RR,;;Health Aff. 13(5):46–64
50. Shortell SM, Morrison EM,;;34(4):471–92
51. Shortell SM, Morrison EM, Hughes SL,
Friedman BS,;;of ownership, environment, and strategy.
In Adv. Health Econ. Health Serv. Res.,;;ed. RM Scheffler, LF Rossiter, 7:3–40
52. Vita MG,;;tio analysis of merged hospitals. In Adv.
Health Econ. Health Serv. Res.,;; ed. RM
Scheffler, LF Rossiter,;;